Mount Everest&mdash;also known as Sagarmatha or Chomolungma&mdash;is the highest mountain on Earth, as measured by the height of its summit above sea level. The mountain, which is part of the Himalaya range in High Asia, is located on the border between Nepal and Tibet. Its summit was first reached in 1953 by Edmund Hillary of New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay of Nepal. Its exact height is debated, but is approximately 29,000 feet above sea level. Climbing Everest has generated controversy in recent years as well over 200 people have died climbing the mountain.[3]
 Challenging Everest
Mount Everest as seen from the Rongbuk Monastery.

Several attempts to challenge Everest had failed before it was finally conquered in 1953.[4] The most famous of the previous challengers was the British adventurer George Mallory, who disappeared with his climbing partner Andrew Irvine, somewhere high on the northeast ridge during the first ascent of the mountain in June, 1924. The pair&#039;s last known sighting was only a few hundred meters from the summit. Mallory&#039;s ultimate fate was unknown for 75 years, until 1999 when his body was finally discovered.

In 1951, a British expedition led by Eric Shipton and including Edmund Hillary, traveled into Nepal to survey a new route via the southern face. Taking their cue from the British, in 1952 a Swiss expedition attempted to climb via the southern face, but the assault team of Raymond Lambert and Sherpa Tenzing Norgay turned back 600 feet short of the summit. The Swiss attempted another expedition in the autumn of 1952; this time a team including Lambert and Tenzing turned back at an earlier stage in the climb.

In 1953, a ninth British expedition, led by Baron of Llanfair Waterdine, John Hunt, returned to Nepal. Hunt selected two climbing pairs to attempt to reach the summit. The first pair turned back after becoming exhausted high on the mountain. The next day, the expedition made its second and final assault on the summit with its fittest and most determined climbing pair. The summit was eventually reached at 11:30 a.m. local time on May 29, 1953 by the New Zealander Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, climbing the South Col Route. At the time, both acknowledged it as a team effort by the whole expedition, but Tenzing revealed a few years later that Hillary had put his foot on the summit first. They paused at the summit to take photographs and buried a few sweets and a small cross in the snow before descending. News of the expedition&#039;s success reached London on the morning of Queen Elizabeth II&#039;s coronation. Returning to Kathmandu a few days later, Hillary and Hunt discovered that they had been promptly knighted for their efforts.
Naming

The ancient Sanskrit names for the mountain are Devgiri for &quot;Holy Mountain,&quot; and Devadurga. The Tibetan name is Chomolungma or Qomolangma, meaning &quot;Mother of the Universe,&quot; and the related Chinese name is Zhūm&ugrave;lǎngmǎ Fēng or Sh&egrave;ngmǔ Fēng.

In 1865, the mountain was given its English name by Andrew Scott Waugh, the British surveyor-general of India. With both Nepal and Tibet closed to foreign travel, he wrote:

    I was taught by my respected chief and predecessor, Colonel Sir [George] Everest to assign to every geographical object its true local or native appellation. But here is a mountain, most probably the highest in the world, without any local name that we can discover, whose native appellation, if it has any, will not very likely be ascertained before we are allowed to penetrate into Nepal. In the meantime the privilege as well as the duty devolves on me to assign&hellip;a name whereby it may be known among citizens and geographers and become a household word among civilized nations.

Waugh chose to name the mountain after Everest, first using the spelling &quot;Mont Everest,&quot; and then &quot;Mount Everest.&quot; However, the modern pronunciation of Everest is in fact different from Sir George&#039;s own pronunciation of his surname.

In the early 1960s, the Nepalese government realized that Mount Everest had no Nepalese name. This was because the mountain was not known and named in ethnic Nepal, that is, the Kathmandu valley and surrounding areas. The government set out to find a name for the mountain since the Sherpa/Tibetan name Chomolangma was not acceptable, as it would have been against the idea of unification, or Nepalization, of the country. The name Sagarmatha in Sanskrit for &quot;Head of the Sky&quot; was thus invented by Baburam Acharya.

In 2002, the Chinese People&#039;s Daily newspaper published an article making a case against the continued use of the English name for the mountain in the Western world, insisting that it should be referred to by its Tibetan name. The newspaper argued that the Chinese name preceded the English one, as Mount Qomolangma was marked on a Chinese map more than 280 years ago.